# The Assert testing framework

Test::Unit style testing framework, just better than Test::Unit.

## What Assert is

* **Framework**: you define tests and the context they run in - Assert runs them.  Everything is pure ruby so use any 3rd party testing tools you like.  Create 3rd party tools that extend Assert behavior.
* **First Class**: everything is a first class object and can be extended to your liking (and should be)
* **MVC**: tests and how they are defined (M) and executed (C) are distinct from how you view the test results (V).
* **Backwards compatible**: (assuming a few minor tweaks) with Test::Unit test suites

## What Assert is not

* **Rspec**
* **Unit/Functional/Integration/etc**: Assert is agnostic - you define whatever kinds of tests you like (one or more of the above) and assert runs them in context.
* **Mock/Spec/BDD/Factories/etc**: Assert is the framework and there are a variety of 3rd party tools to do such things - feel free to use whatever you like.

## Description

Assert is a Test::Unit style testing framework.  This means you can write tests in Assert the same way you would with test-unit.  In addition, Assert adds some helpers and syntax sugar to enhance the way tests are written - most taken from ideas in [Shoulda](https://github.com/thoughtbot/shoulda) and [Leftright](https://github.com/jordi/leftright/).  Assert uses class-based contexts so if you want to nest your contexts, use good old inheritance.

Assert is tested using itself.  The tests are a pretty good place to look for examples and usage patterns.

## Installation

```
$ gem install assert
```

## Usage

```ruby
require 'assert'

class MyTests < Assert::Context

  def test_something
    assert_equal 1, 1
  end

end
```

## Models

Assert models exist to define, collect, structure, and report on Assert test data.

### Suite

A `Suite` object is reponsible for collecting and structuring tests and defines the set of tests to run using the test `Runner`.  Tests are grouped within the suite by their context.  Suite provides access to the contexts, tests, and test results.  In addition, the Suite model provides some stats (ie. run_time, runner_seed, etc...).

### Runner

A `Runner` object is responsible for running a suite of tests and firing event callbacks to the `View`.  Any runner object should take the test suite and view as arguments and should provide a 'run' method that runs the tests and renders the view.

### Context

A `Context` object is the scope that tests are run in.  When tests are run, a new instance of the test context is created and the test code is evaluated within the scope of this context instance.  Context provides methods for defining tests and test callbacks and for generating test results in running tests.  Subclass context classes to achieve nested context behavior.

### Test

A `Test` object defines the test code that needs to be run and the results generated by that test code.  Tests are aware of their context and are responsible for running their code in context.

### Result

A `Result` object defines the data related to a test result.  There are a few kinds of test results available:

* `Pass`
* `Fail`
* `Error`
* `Skip`
* `Ignore`

Tests produce results as they are executed.  Every `assert` statement produces a result.  Some results, like `Error` and `Skip`, will halt execution.  `Pass` and `Ignore` results do not halt execution.  `Fail` results, by default, halt execution but there is an option to have them not halt execution.  Therefore, tests can have many results of varying types.

### View

A `View` object is responsible for rendering test result output.  Assert provides a `Assert::View::Base` object to provide common helpers and default runner callback handlers for building views.  Assert also provides a `Assert::View::DefaultView` that it renders its output with.  See the "Viewing Test Results" section below for more details.

### Macro

Macros are procs that define sets of test code and make it available for easy reuse.  Macros work nicely with the 'should' and 'test' context methods.

## User Options and Helpers

Assert provides ways for setting user-specfic options and helpers.  When Assert is setting itself up, the last setup step is to look for and require the file `~/.assert/options.rb`.  This file is essentially a user level test helper file.  Use it to set options, configure assert extensions, setup/define how to view test results, etc.

## Running Tests

Assert uses its [`Assert::Runner`](https://github.com/teaminsight/assert/blob/master/lib/assert/runner.rb) object to run tests by default.  This runner runs its suite's tests in random order based on the suite's `runner_seed`.

You can extend this default runner or use your own runner implementation.  Either way, specify that you want to use your new runner class by adding this to your user options file

```ruby
Assert.runner  MyAwesomeRunner
```

### Test Order

The default runner object runs tests in random order and the `DefaultView` view will display the seed value.  If you want to run tests in a consistant order, set a 'runner_seed' environment variable.  Here's an example running tests with rake:

```
$ rake test                   # run tests in random order
$ rake test runner_seed=1234  # run tests seeding with '1234'
```

## Viewing Test Results

You have a few options when it comes to viewing test results in Assert.  Assert comes with its own `DefaultView` class that handles displaying test results.

First, lets look at the default: `Assert::View::DefaultView`.  This is the default view class.  Its output goes something like this:

* before the run starts, output some info about the test suite that is about to run
* print out result abbreviations as the test results are generated
* after the run finishes...
* display any result details (from failing or error results) in reverse test/result order
* output some summary info

You can run assert's test suite using `rake test` and get a feel for what this default outputs.  This view has a few options you can tweak:

* `styled`: whether to apply ANSI styles to the output, default `true`
* `pass_styles`: how to style pass result output, default `:green`
* `fail_styles`: default `:red, :bold`
* `error_styles`: default `:yellow, :bold`
* `skip_styles`: default `:cyan`
* `ignore_styles`: default: `:magenta`

To override an option, do so in your user options file:

```ruby
Assert.view.options.styled  false
```

However, the view you use is configurable.  Define you own view class and specify it in your `~/.assert/options.rb` file:

```ruby
class MyCustomView < Assert::View::Base
  # define your view here...
end

Assert.options.view  MyCustomView.new
```

### Anatomy of a View

A view class handles the logic and templating of test result output.  A view class should inherit from `Assert::View::Base`.  This defines default callback handlers for the test runner and gives access to a bunch of common helpers for reading test result data.

Each view should implement the callback handler methods to output information at different points during the running of a test suite.  Callbacks have access to any view methods and should output information using `puts` and `prints`.  See the `DefaultView` template for a usage example.

Available callbacks from the runner, and when they are called:

* `before_load`: at the beginning, before the suite is loaded
* `after_load`: after the suite is loaded, just before `on_start`
* `on_start`: when a loaded test suite starts running
* `before_test`: before a test starts running, the test is passed as an arg
* `on_result`: when a running tests generates a result, the result is passed as an arg
* `after_test`: after a test finishes running, the test is passed as an arg
* `on_finish`: when the test suite is finished running

Beyond that, each view can do as it sees fit.  Initialize how you wish, take whatever options you'd like, and output results as you see fit, given the available callbacks.

### Using 3rd party views

To use a 3rd party custom view, you first require it in and then specify using the `Assert.options.view` option.  Assert provides a helper for requiring in views.  It can be used in two ways.  You can pass a fully qualified path to the helper and if it exists, will require it in.

```ruby
Assert::View.require_user_view '/path/to/my/view'
```

Alternatively, you can install/clone/copy/write your view implementations in `~/.assert/views` and require it in by name.  To have assert require it by name, have it installed at `~/assert/views/view_name/lib/view_name.rb` (this structure is compatible with popular conventions in rubygem development). For example:

```ruby
# assuming ~/.assert/views/my-custom-view/lib/my-custom-view.rb exists
# this will require it in
Assert::View.require_user_view 'my-custom-view'
```

Once your view class is required in, use it and configure it just as you would any view.

## Failure Handling

Assert, by default, will halt test execution when a test produces a Fail result.  However, Assert provides an option to not halt when Fail results are produced.  You can control how assert handles fails by either setting a user option (in your user `~/.assert/options.rb` file):

```ruby
Assert::Test.options.halt_on_fail  false   # force not halting on fail results
```

or by setting an env variable:

```
$ rake test halt_on_fail=true             # force halt on failure using an env var
```

## Rake Tasks

Assert provides some rake task helpers that will scan your test folder and recursively generate rake tasks for each one of your test folders or files.  Test files must end in either `'_test.rb'` or `'_tests.rb'`.  Use this as an alternative to running ruby on each one of your test files individually.

As an example, say your test folder has a file structure like so:

```
- test
|  - basic_test.rb
|  - helper.rb
|  - complex
|  |  - fast_tests.rb
|  |  - slow_tests.rb
```

Add the following to your Rakefile to generate the test tasks:

```ruby
require 'assert/rake_tasks'
Assert::RakeTasks.install
```

This would generate following rake tasks:

```
$ rake -T
rake test                         # Run all tests
rake test:basic                   # Run tests for basic
rake test:complex                 # Run all tests for assertions
rake test:complex:fast            # Run tests for assertions:assert_block
rake test:complex:slow            # Run tests for assertions:assert_empty
```

By default, the rake tasks do not show which test files are being loaded.  If you want to see this output from the rake tasks, set a "show_loaded_files" environment variable at the rake command line:

```
$ rake test show_loaded_files=true  # run the tests showing which files were loaded
```

## IRB with your environment loaded

Assert provides a rake task for running irb with your test environment loaded.  Create an `irb.rb` file in your test file directory and have it `require 'assert/setup'`.  See [Assert's irb.rb](https://github.com/teaminsight/assert/blob/master/test/irb.rb) for an example.  Here's how you could use it:

```
$ rake irb
> Assert
 => Assert
```

## The Assert family of testing tools

TODO: add in references to assert related tools.

## Contributing

The source code is hosted on Github.  Feel free to submit pull requests and file bugs on the issues tracker.

If submitting a Pull Request, please:

1. Fork it
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Added some feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
5. Create new Pull Request

One note: please respect that Assert itself is intended to be the flexible, base-level type logic that should change little if at all.  Pull requests for niche functionality or personal testing philosphy stuff will likely not be accepted.

If you wish to extend Assert for your niche purpose/desire/philosophy, please do so in it's own gem (preferrably named 'assert-<whatever>') that uses Assert as a dependency.  When you do, tell us about it and we'll add to this readme with a short description.
